---
layout: indianlands
title: "Wampumneag: 1620+ with Plymouth, Massachusetts Bay Colony"
year: "1620-1665"
description: "Wampum Belt"
date: 2017-08-27 15:20:08 -0700
categories: project
tags: missionization of Wampanoags, praying towns, Massasoit, nation to nation, world death, colonization, entitlement by doctrine of discovery, terra nullism, cultureloss, clansystembreakdown, feudalism, indian relations contained in plantation, settlers
---
- **1621**
- Treaty of Peace - with Plymouth Colony and King of England (photo of a transcription from Seaweed Revelations by Amelia Bingham)
- **1665**
- Deed of 1665 - Relevant content from historical source

When the Pilgrims met the Wampanoags (also known as Pokonoket, Nauset, and
South Sea Indians) in 1620 they anticipated that these "People of the First Light" had a natural
right to the lands and waters they hunted, fished, cultivated, and dwelled in. They were sovereigns of
the land and these rights (recognized by the King of England in a Treaty of Peace and other deeds signed with
the supreme sachem Massaoit). Just as nations in Europe today recognize one another, other first
peoples surrounding the Wampanoags (Narrangansets, Iroquois, Mohawk and Delaware) also knew and
respected the customs and borders of the Wampanoag and traded with them through their shared
currency: _wampum_. Wampum - as a source of value - was so valuable it was worn used in contracts
and worn as jewelry. The Wampumneag (wampum belt) is a replica of the 'crown' wore by the supreme
sachem of the Wampanoag at the time the Pilgrims met them. Decorated by figures of eel, deer, snipe,
turkey, bear, and turtle, the crown depicted not only the major clans but also the presiding cosmology
of all Amerindians at the time: that multi-naturalism, whereby humans gain their moral authority and natural
rights not from a supernatural God above, but from the sacrifice (or gift of their body) that moral creatures
(animals) share with humans. This cosmology - shared by people indigenous to North and South America -
was represented by the Doctrine of Discovery as evidence that indigenous people were savage (not Christian).
Under the Doctrine of Discovery, land occupied by "savages" was taken as _terra nullius_. In this way,
Native Americans, and the Wampanoag's natural rights first of all, were replaced by civil rights. So it
happened that Wampanoag's were assumed to have given up their natural rights when they became "civilized"
residents of New England's original "Praying Towns". The formation of one such town, Mashpee (Wôpanâak: great
water place), however, was originally because Wampanoags sought sanctuary from King Phillip's War - the great irony being however that the refuge they sought, the English Pilgrims called a "plantation" - among the first established in the new world and for which human slavery (based on racial differences) as an idea began to take place.
