---
layout: indianlands
title: "Failed Trial for Federal Recognition as a Tribe"
year: "1977"
description: "<strike>Indian</strike> Lands"
date: 2017-08-27 15:55:35 -0700
categories: project
tags: triracial isolates, fallout, aftermath, lost identity, no federal recognition, not a tribe, not indian, no casino, no economic development, no indian customs, no sacred relations, quick sales, allotments lost, wampanoags displaced, rise in urban indians, prime real estate, racial optics in America, gender politics
---
- US District Court for the District of Massachusetts: Mashpee Tribe vs. New Seabury Corp et. al. Ruling
- US Discrict Court for the District of Massachusetts: Third Party Complaint Against the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Civil Action 76-3190-S
- Amelia Peters Bingham as Absent, Key Witness to the Trial
- Identity in Mashpee by James Clifford

In North America, the Wampanoag (People of the First Light) could be considered to have suffered the
onslaughts of Colonialism the first and the worst. By some critical accounts, it has even been considered
a world death - that has not yet ended. It has not ended because it has been 400 years of arbitrary, legal
fashion, shifting between colonial powers (Plymouth and Massachusetts Bay), nations (England and the
United States) and even Eastern and Western Land Policies. What applies to tribes East of the Mississippi
foregrounds what happened to those West of it, but what applies to the West rarely is applied recursively.
This is the why another supreme irony resides in the legislation and cases for justice Indian peoples have
sought within America: in spite of cultural genocide being a valid claim for human rights abuses, Indian
tribes within America since 1977 have had the cruel burden of cultural proof put upon them. Only in
what could be called by Federal Indian Lawyer Walter Echohawk, the "Courts of the Conquerers" would
a criteria for Federal Recognition be the very thing lost in colonialism: one's tribal identity, culture, and
group cohesion. But this was the case in 1977 when the Mashpee-Wampanoag peoples sought to delimit
common land being sold by the town of Mashpee to new developers called the New Seabury
Corporation. In the attached documents, one can read the details of the case, and the grounds on which
the Mashpee-Wampanoag had to prove they were a "tribe" meeting the anthropological definition
thereof, as well as the American jurors oddly shadowed obsession with the Mashpee-Wampanoag's 'race'
rather than their culture, or their right to be recognized by the Colonial government that has been
endorsing and justifying if not perpetuating not just cultural genocide, but also genocide and ecocide for
300 years plus on Cape Cod. Had they not, the _Wampumneag_ can tell us what would be there today - as
many non-humans of the deer, turkey, eel, turtle, snipe, bear and wolf species as there are of those who
have taken their sacrifice. But where are those clans, those supernatural persons, and where is the
natural law that takes their gifts as 'expressions' of who are the chosen people of the land?

I was born in 1977 and only later became an anthropologist reading James' Cliffords account of the trial
in Identity in Mashpee. But given the 300+ years of colonization prior, a 1977 case is fairly recent. What
role do and can anthropologists' take - either in the ethical or ontological turn - to account for the
injustices our concepts - "tribe", "liberalism, or "possessive individualism" have wrought?

I met Elizabeth Sturgis - great granddaughter of Rhoda Attaquin-Sturgis (Salvage Ethnographer Frank
Speck's Key Informant) in 2004. She had studied anthropology like me but in New York with Eleanor
Leacock in the 1970s - learning about her own people and meeting individuals like AIM founder and
actor Russell Means. I studied at Syracuse and McGill only very recently, but focused mainly on Southern
Africa, legal anthropology and medical anthropology. We worked at the Queens Botanical Garden
together for a year and later, I tried to write up my work that included Sturgis and multiple other second
and third generations' botanical knowledge for the IJHS. It was rejected on grounds that Sturgis's
indigenous knowledge did not pertain to the multiculturalism of the Garden's mission. Indeed, her
mother's and her own displacement from their families' matrilineal land in Mashpee, at the hands of an
uncle, and subsequent harm experienced separated from a 'place' in Mashpee, in spite of tribal
membership, was very radical stuff indeed.
