---
layout: indianlands
title: "Quick Sales"
year: "1978-2005"
description: "Men's <strike>Indian</strike> Lands"
date: 2017-08-27 15:57:16 -0700
categories: project
tags: fallout, aftermath, harm, intergenerational trauma, culture loss, land loss, customary relations lost, customary inheritance, familial customs, lateral violence, gender politics, role of first massachusetts commissioner on indian affairs, american indian activism, pan indianism, Amelia Bingham clan mother, lateral violence, Massachusetts common wealth negligence, displacement, urban indians, motherland, unsettling, ecocide, white development, white in flux, white real estate
---
- Legal Definition of a Quick Sale
- Key Witness Elizabeth Sturgis Stop's Life History
- Intergenerational Trauma Defined
- Lateral Violence Defined
- Rhoda Attaquin Sturgis - 45 acres: Heirs/ Sold

When the Wampanoags were legally-denied "Indian" status through Federal Recognition of a Tribe, they
had very little hope that their lands or rights would be protected. Even with allotment lands only being
given to Indian descendants like Rhoda Attaquin's family, Allotments were not the same as the Indian
Lands designated in the Federal Non-Intercourse Act - a legal category that had become something of a
"myth" over the years of jurisprudence and ruling against tribal and Indian people. Indian Land, with the
Indian Reorganization Act, was replaced by "tribal land"- but Indians (following the Carcieri Act) had to
be recognized as a "tribe" at the time of the Act - in 1934. Anything less, and they did not have a case.
Never mind that the Mashpee-Wampanoag had to prove they were a "tribe" in 5 different dates in
history (dates even preceding contact with Western tribes who were not yet colonized or "settled), the
fall-out of Mashpee-Wampanoag was carefully planned. The town, its' developers, knew what would
happen next, although they did not care about the actual people it happened to or the harm it would do.
With development allowed on the Cape and in Mashpee, real estate prices skyrocketed. But without
associated, economic development for Mashpee-Wampanoag specifically, they had no way to pay taxes on
their land or even make a living. This is when Elizabeth Sturgis's uncle sold his and her mother's
grandmother's (Rhoda Attaquin's) allotment land. Only, Sturgis's uncle neither obtained his sisters'
consent nor shared the funds with her or her five children: of whom, by custom, he was the surrogate
father for (following matrilineal customs). The Commonwealth of Massachusetts (formed from the
former Plymouth Bay and Massachusetts Bay Colonies) should have anticipated this outcome - as the
'trust' relation most tribes have with the Federal government was never handed over to the Federal
government and indeed the Pamasquoddy Tribe of Maine (formerly of the Mass. Bay Colony) were able to
get land into trust from Massachusetts because of this responsibility. Unfortunately, for the Mashpee-
Wampanoag, that case was affirmed however by an ancient treaty recorded on deer hide that official
documentation proved was meant to be "lost": the Mashpee-Wampanoag have no such enduring
evidence, and evidence of its natural, sovereign, moral and cosmological 'right' to land through the Creator's gift of the non-humans and the clan system documented in the _Wampumneag_ above was lost
as a "spoil of war" during King Phillip's War.

As a result, lateral violence, brother against sister, mother against sons and daughters has been
experienced by the descendants of a tribe once known firstly for their generosity to the Pilgrims during
the Wampanoag's own harvest festival - _keepemuk_, not "Thanksgiving".
