---
layout: indianlands
title: "Federal Recognition of Tribe Granted"
year: "2007-2016"
description: "Indian <strike>Lands</strike>"
date: 2017-08-27 15:59:15 -0700
categories: project
tags: aftermath, fallout, tribe without tribal land, coming full circle, tribal court, Tale of Tisquantum, medicine circle
---
- Newspaper article
- Federal Recognition Granted
- 2008 Ruling on Amelia Bingham Class Action Against the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: No Individual Grounds for Harm

The aftermath of 400 years of arbitrary, legal fashion that have lead to cultural genocide, ecocide,
displacement, colonization of the mind, and lateral violence can hardly have been said to have come full circle
when the Mashpee-Wampanoag finally did receive Federal Recognition as a Tribe in 2007. Not only
was a massive campaign to collect every Wampanoag's birth certificate to show that, racially, yes the
majority were Indian and Wampanoag (not 'triracial isolates', but also many Wampanoag women's rights,
dignity, and cultural practices were sacrificed in the process. A key example is Sturgis's family. But another
is the cases shown by Amelia Bingham - a key player in organizing the tribal council, the Wampanoag
museum, establishing a Massachusetts Commissioner on Indian Affairs, and re-writing the tribal history in
line with both ethnohistorical accounts, oral traditions, and actual archival documents. Bingham's case is
exceptional not only because her successes irritated the newly formed tribal council of Wampanoag men - who failing in their quest for tribal recognition - proceeded to issue a 'formal ban' on her presence in
"tribal affairs". But it is also interesting because of the grounds on which she, a culturally and financially
powerful female Wampanoag, was both advised to and those grounds lost her class action case. The
grounds were: she was an 'individual' (not endorsed by the all-male Wampanoag council) and she showed
no "harm" for lands lost.

Class Action cases are meant to be taken up for collective rights. It's true, but having no council to back
her, Bingham took the case anyway on behalf of the tribe (it says nowhere one has to be the employer or
hold a very specific office to take a class action on behalf of others - just that they share a class of
relations e.g. are all Indian, or all employees). But the tribal council of men saw it as against their interests
in power, not being Indian, to not back Bingham so they objected. But aside from that key detail about
the internal, class and gender politics within a tribe, Bingham herself had allotment land and was in no
way suffering. She and members of her family ended up on the right side of history given the fall-outs
that happened to Sturgis's following 1977. However, she still invested heavily in a lawyer to take the case
because of a sense of injustice happening to and within Mashpee-Wampanoag worlds - a sense held
collectively, but not as forcefully as Bingham. The important thing to note, however, in terms of justice
coming full-circle if it ever is to do so - is that Sturgis' herself and family has suffered harm as a direct
consequence of being displaced from their family allotment land - given to them because they were
Indian, but not protected no doubt also because of racism, classism, sexism, and because they were Indian - by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

So how do we take the individual evidence of "harm" - linked to wider, demographic studies of historical
and intergenerational trauma in Indian Country - as well as often healed by 'culture' - as a capacity for
culture as a path forward to justice?
